Taking Faster and Smarter to New Physical Frontiers
The value of computers is often measured with terms like gigahertz, petaflop and exabyte the speed, scale and efficiency with which they perform computations.
But so what? The intrinsic worth of computation ought to be a matter of the types of information being computed upon, and of when and where these computations occur. When you are lost, for example, a phone that will compute your route home is worth far more to you than an inaccessible desktop PC, no matter how fancy and powerful.
So a better way to think about the future of computing might be to ask when and where we could improve our ability to compute upon information that we greatly care about.
Consider a simple "computer" that counts to just 256, using eight bits of data storage. Could such a computer have any significant value?
Well, what if such computers could be installed inside every cell of your body? What if these computers were used to keep track of how many times each of your cells divided, forming the basis of systems that could track and control aging, development and cancer? If too many divisions are detected, programmed cell death could be set off before a tumor had a chance to form.
Such computers would have incredible value for basic research and medical biotechnology. But note that these computers would derive all their value from being able to connect with and compute inside living cells, a place that no silicon-based computer can now operate.
So would it be possible to build simple computers that operate inside living cells or other new places? Yes though in the case of biology, such computers would most likely need to be engineered from biological molecules.
Fortunately, sustained basic research since the early 1980s has taught us how natural biological systems might be adapted to store information and compute upon it. Now, researchers are starting to systematically apply this knowledge to develop scalable living data storage systems and simple computational interfaces.
For example, digital information can be stored inside cells by flipping DNA sequences back and forth or by controlling protein levels and locations. In more detail, a DNA sequence that can be switched between two possible orientations can be used to represent and store "0" in one orientation and "1" in the other, which taken together represent one bit.
Other research is exploring how RNA, for example, can be engineered to control the reading and writing of information to synthetic biological bits. But we are still a long way from achieving a reliable genetically encoded eight-bit counter.
When and where else might we find new places to compute upon information? Obviously, improved access to information and computation in many human and cultural systems will be important, from seemingly mundane advances in conference room scheduling or building ventilation to improved medical and political decision-making systems.
But most such futures are foreseeable; they will be based on traditional computing architectures and engineered silicon, and they are likely to be limited by an array of human factors: for example, who controls the room-scheduling system? Who gets access, and how can access be better scaled?
I dream of much broader achievements. For example, suppose we could partner with microbes and plants to record events, natural or otherwise, and convert this information into easily observed signals. That would greatly expand our ability to monitor the environment. And I imagine foods that tell us whether they are organic just by looking at them.
So the future of computing need not only be a question of putting people and things together with ubiquitous silicon computers. The future will be much richer if we can imagine new modes of computing in new places and with new materials and then find ways to bring those new modes to life.
